Here, I want to differentiate between state dimensions and ensemble
dimensions. A state dimension is a dimension that is used to define any
instance of the climate. Typically, the lat, lon, and lev dimensions are
state dimensions because they are used to define the "value" of the climate
for ANY realization of the climate.

Conversely, an ensemble dimension is a dimension that is used to define a
particular realization of the climate. The time and run dimensions are
often ensemble dimensions because each time step in a different run details
one possible climate state.

For practical purposes, the key difference between state and ensemble
dimensions is that the indices of state dimensions are fixed for every
ensemble member, while the indices of ensemble dimensions are different for
every ensemble member.

For example: If I use a state vector that is all grid points in the
Northern Hemisphere at all longitudes at the surface, then lat lon and lev
all have fixed values for each element in the state vector regardless of
which ensemble member we are looking at. (True, lat and lon will have
different values at different grid points, but their values at each
individual grid point is unchanging.)

If I build an ensemble of such state vectors drawn from random time
steps in random model runs, then time and run will have different values
for the elements in different state vectors in the ensemble. Thus, time and
run are ensemble dimensions.


Here's a different example for contrast:
Let's say I'm doing a study on volcanic impacts, and I look at the same
state vectors as before, except that I only look at annual mean of 1893 in
each ensemble run. In this case, time is a state dimension, NOT an ensemble
dimensions, because the value of time is fixed across every ensemble member.