---
layout: simple_layout
title: Welcome!
---

# Welcome to the ensembleMetadata tutorial

This tutorial provides a guide for working efficiently with state vector ensembles using the "ensembleMetadata" class. If you'd like to work through the tutorial offline, or in the MATLAB console, you can download it <a href="ensemble-tutorial.zip" download>here</a> or from the [tutorials branch](https://github.com/JonKing93/DASH/tree/Tutorials) on Github.

If you're already familiar with the ensemble and ensembleMetadata classes and just want a refresher, or if you're in a hurry, you may be interested in the ensemble [quickstart](quickstart).

<br>
### Prerequisites

As with all DASH modules, these require MATLAB 2018B or higher. If you are using an earlier version, you will need to [upgrade](https://www.mathworks.com/help/install/ug/upgrade-matlab-release.html) your release.

The ensembleMetadata class manipulate outputs that are generated by the stateVector class. If you're not familiar with the stateVector module, you will want to see the [stateVector tutorial](../stateVector/welcome). You may also wish to see the [ensemble tutorial](../ensemble/welcome) if working with state vector ensembles saved to file.

<br>
#### Help from the Matlab console

This tutorial covers the ensembleMetadata commands. However, you can also use
```matlab
help ensembleMetadata
```
to display an overview of commands to the Matlab console, and
```matlab
help ensembleMetadata.commandName
```
to display help for a particular command. Alternatively use
```matlab
doc ensembleMetadata
doc ensembleMetadata.commandName
```
to show help in the Matlab documentation browser.

Alright, let's start the tutorial!

[Next](intro)
